(upbeat music)
(computer keys clicking)
Alright, so, let's get cracking on this solution.
I'm in the Integer Linked Lists class
that was included with the starter project.
And here's the insert sorted method.
So I'll just delete this comment
and as we can see, it accepts an integer value.
The first thing we need to do is check
whether the list is empty, because if the list is empty
we can obviously just insert the node.
And the other thing that we're going to check
is whether the first node in the list
so if the list isn't empty, we're gonna check whether
the first node in the list is greater than or equal to
the value we're inserting because in that case
we can just insert the new node
at the head of the list.
And so, we're gonna say if head equals null
because that means that the list is empty
or head.getvalue
is greater than or equal to the value we want
to insert in both of these cases
we wanna just go ahead and just add the new value
at the front.
We'll just call our add to front method
with the value
and we're done
and then of course we wanna return.
And so if the list is empty, we just
need to add this new value at the front
cause it'll be in sorted order by default
or if the head value is greater than or equal to the value
then we also know that the correct, sorted position
is right at the front of the list
cause in the main method, we're always calling insert sorted
so the assumption that we're making here
and I'll put this in here assumption
the list is sorted
this wouldn't work, this part wouldn't work
if the list was not sorted.
Obviously, if the list wasn't sorted
we wouldn't even call this method
it wouldn't make a lot of sense.
Okay, so assuming that we don't have one of those two cases
so we're not going to be inserting the new value
at the front of the list we then need
to find the insertion point.
So, let's find the insertion point.
Now, one wrinkle here is that we have a singly linked list.
So what we're gonna do is we're going
to traverse the list looking for the first node
with a value that's greater than or equal
to the value that we want to insert.
So let's say we find that node and so let's say
we have a current node and that node
is pointing to the node that has a value greater than
or equal to the value we want to insert.
Well, it's easy for us to create a new node
and point that new node's next field to the current node
but what about the previous node's next field?
It's currently pointing to the current node
and we need to change it's next field so that
it can point to the node with the new value.
But it's a singly linked list, so
if we only have a pointer to current,
there's no way for us to get back
to the previous node in the list.
So we're gonna have to have two fields
one for traversing the list and then another field
that's going to be one position behind the current field.
And so, when we finally hit a node that has a value
greater than or equal to the one we're inserting
the previous field will be pointing to the node before that.
We'll say integer node current
this is the one we're gonna use to traverse the list
it's gonna equal head.getNext
we don't have to check head cause we already did that here.
And so, if we're down here, we know that
the value in head is less than the value we're inserting.
So we don't need to check it again.
But
we're gonna have a previous and that's
going to point to head.
So when we start out, our current node is gonna start
at the head, at head.getNext, that's the first
value we're gonna check and our previous node
is at head, our previous node is always going to be
one behind the current node.
And then we're gonna say while current is not equal to null
and current.getValue
is less than the value we're inserting
because the moment we hit a value that's greater than
or equal we wanna stop.
While that's true, we're gonna set previous to current
and we're gonna set current to current.getNext.
And so by doing this, we're constantly keeping previous
one back from where current is.
And so when we drop out of the loop,
there are two possibilities here.
Current is null or current isn't null
meaning that we've hit a node with a value that's
greater than or equal to the value we want to insert.
Now, we don't have to handle the special case
of current being null, because
we're not going to change anything in current.
So we don't have to worry that oh, we've hit
the end of the list.
If we have hit the end of the list,
that means that we're going to be inserting
the new value as the last node in the list
and that's fine.
We don't have to worry about oh, if we're at the end
of the list and we've gotta do something differently.
We don't have to worry about that, as you'll see.
We now need to create a node for the new value.
We need to set that node's next field
and we need to set the next field
of whatever previous is pointing to
to point to the new node.
And so we'll say integerNode newNode equals
new IntegerNode for the value
and then we're gonna say newNode.setnext
current
because we're inserting the new node before
the current node because we wanna insert in sorted order
and we know that current has a value
it's the first node we've seen that has a value
that's greater than or equal to
the value we wanna insert.
So we're gonna insert the new node in front of current so
its next field will point to current
and now we have to handle the previous' next field.
Because whatever previous is pointing to
it now wants to point to the new node.
So our previous.setNext newNode.
And finally, we need to update the size.
And that's it.
If we were inserting this at the end of the list
while current will be null, so it's perfectly fine
for us to say, you know, newNode.setNext null
it's sort of a redundant operation
but it's not expensive so we'll just go ahead
and do that.
Let's go to our main method and in here
we've created four integers, one, two, three and four
and we're gonna insert three, two, one and four
so let's run.
And we'll see that we start out by inserting three
and then we insert two so now we'll have two, three.
We insert one so we'll have one, two, three
and finally, we insert four.
And so we have one, two, three, four
that's exactly what we want.
And you'll see that in the last case
we were inserting at the end of the list.
And we didn't run into any problems.
So I think the only tricky part for this one
which is why I wanted to use a single linked list
was to realise that
we need to have two fields now you might have come up
with a different implementation
there may be a way to do this without using two fields.
You may be able to somehow be a couple of nodes back
and be using .getNext .getNext but I like
to write really clear code so I've done it this way
using two fields.
Alright, that's it for this challenge.